What is Git?

“Git is a distributed version control system that helps track changes in source code.
It allows developers to create snapshots of their work, manage branches, collaborate safely, and roll back to earlier versions when needed.”

What is GitHub?

“GitHub is a cloud-based hosting platform for Git repositories.
It provides collaboration tools like pull requests, issue tracking, code reviews, and remote backups.
Git is the version control tool, while GitHub is the service that stores Git repositories online.”

What are the main differences between Git and GitHub?

Answer:
Git is a version control tool installed on your machine, while GitHub is an online service that hosts Git repositories. You can use Git without GitHub, but GitHub requires Git.”

How do you initialize a Git repository?

git init

This creates a hidden .git folder that starts version control.

How do you configure Git?

“After installing Git, I configure my identity globally because Git requires name and email for commits.”

git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "your@email.com"

I verify settings with:”

git config --global --list

What are the Git stages?

“Git has three main stages:

Working Directory – where files are created or modified.

Staging Area – files you select with git add to include in the next commit.

Repository – the .git folder where committed snapshots are stored.”

“The flow is: edit → stage → commit.”

explain the difference between git add and git commit

Answer:
“git add moves changes to the staging area, while git commit permanently records the staged changes into the repository with a message.”

What is git status? (Interview Answer)

git status is a Git command that shows the current state of your working directory and staging area.
It tells you what has changed and what Git is tracking.

What is a real-world Git workflow?

Answer:
“My workflow is:
clone → create branch → write code → add → commit → pull → push → open PR → review → merge.”